---
layout: post
title: Shadowrun Themes
permlink: Shadowrun Themes
tags: [opinion, shadowrun]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
Shadowrun, as originally envisioned, is a vision of the future as seen through the lens of 1980s cyberpunk. We can easily pick out the tropes that come out as a result of this. The future is dystopian, and individual liberty is questionable. Governments are weak in the face of looming megacorporations that dictate the agenda of almost all human life. There are resource shortages as a result of accident, (meta)human neglect, and rampant overpopulation of the planet. Civilized society exists in a police state maintained by the powers that be, and those without identify fall between the cracks, forgotten. It is in these cracks that the Shadowrun characters thrive. As people outside the system, they are the punk in Shadowrun's cyberpunk. Counter-cultural antiheroes, since they are outside of mainstream society they are able to see it all the more clearly for what it is. These antiheroes use their outside status as an asset, as it's this very status that allows them to undertake the risky activities that are their bread and butter. Hackers dance along electron waves, playing inside the computer-as-magical-wonderland that is cyberspace. There's a world inside the computer, and the shores of virtual reality beckon to those who would plumb its secrets. Street samurai are people who have gone under the knife to come out sharp and honed, using augmentations to turn themselves into something more than human. Cyberpunk gets us here, too, however, and even as these street samurai become better than human, at the same time they are also less than they were before, as the machine eats at the very essence of who they are. Shadowrun follows many of the tropes straight, and sprinkles in a few from fantasy as well, adopting a magic system and some of the tropes that go along with it. While it eschews the overaching good versus evil theme that fantasy tends to bring with it, deciding to stay closer to the shades of gray versus black that cyberpunk prefers, other fantasy tropes it plays straight. While magic does not run along hereditary lines like it might in typical fantasy, magic is still limited only to those chosen few lucky enough to be born with it. You cannot train yourself into magic, magic has to first choose you. However, if you look at Shadowrun and take it as a whole, it is not a fantasy system with some science fiction elements as lining. It is instead deeply a cyberpunk setting, with some fantasy setting tropes folded in for flavour.

In Shadowrun, we can see the same tensions of the 1980s that is seen in the rest of cyberpunk. The police state arises from the fears of Orwell's 1984 coming to pass. The burgeoning ecological awareness of the 1980s and the fears that humans were destroying the planet can also be seen in Shadowrun, with its multiple ecological disasters along its timeline. I feel that we can also see a bit of the 1980s concern of a population explosion having come to pass in Shadowrun, with natural wilderness described as scarce, and metahumanity crammed into increasingly cramped spaces in many of the main settings. Of course, fear of technological progress is a theme that occurs in every generation, and an easy one to tap into. Cyberpunk often uses tropes where technological advancement has been decidedly not to humanity's benefit, and Shadowrun has these tropes as well. From multiple reactor meltdowns, and the failure of nuclear devices to operate properly, orbital kill-sats and a drone-enforced surveillance society, we can see core technological infrastructure failing humanity as a whole. On a personal level, computers can fry your brain if you're not careful, pollution is a serious concern for your character's health, and Shadowrun's core augmentation mechanic involves replacing parts of your essence, considered to be the stuff of your character's soul, with machine upgrades.

Some of these tropes and themes are still valid, even using a 2015 lens instead of a 1980 one. While pollution might be considered a solved problem in America, China still struggles with it. Even ignoring the pollution, ecological concerns still exist, even though the major concern of the day is no longer ecological disaster or human overpopulation, but instead has drifted to the threat of global warming. The police state still seems to loom ever closer to being a reality (and depending on who you ask, it already is), as well as the issues of anonymity, privacy, and security among information networks. The computer as magical virtual reality wonderland has not come to pass, but I think even here in 2015 it still makes for a compelling setpiece in a near future story. The details may differ, but the rich wealth of story possibilities that come from a mutable digital landscape are still worth exploring. The cracks in society in the 1980s were envisioned to be between those who worked for or within the system versus the counter culture outside of it. I am not entirely sure as to what the motivation was for the original punk movement, but the new counter-culture is likely to be trying to fight against social inequalities and wealth inequalities present today.

Shadowrun is an excellent setting, and it has aged well, due in no small part to the continuous efforts of its developers to try and keep it modern, often changing it to reflect changes in actual society. However, in many ways it is still a reflection of what the '80s thought the future would look like. I want to retune it to make a new vision of cyberpunk, where we are looking at the future from 2015, and a reflection of our concerns.