---
layout: post
title: Matrix Fluff Design
permlink: Matrix Fluff Design
tags: [opinion, shadowrun]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
One of the major setpieces of Shadowrun is the Matrix. The Matrix is a Gibson-inspired cyberspace, where the avatars of users drift through virtual reality environments. Much as the astral plane is a magical plane parallel to our own, the Matrix can be thought of as a technological plane. The difference is that while the Astral plane is a reflection of reality, cyberspace is not. Instead, one of the running themes of cyberspace is that anything can look like anything. A file can appear as a plain manila folder, as per the desktop motif common in the modern ear. It might also appear as a cloud of ones and zeros, or perhaps as a payrus roll, with information encoded as hieroglyphics. This mutability of metaphor is a wonderful thing, and lends a certain richness and whimsy to the cyberspace arena. It can also be a bit of a hindrance, as the GM has to go to pains to describe everything twice - once for what its current motif or art style is, and again for what it actually really -is-.
<!--more-->
The Matrix has been problematic through Shadowrun's lifespan. On the one hand, it's practically a cyberpunk staple, and certainly at this point, an indispensable part of the setting. Simply removing it from the setting would make the setting poorer, and be doing Shadowrun as a whole a great disservice. On the other hand, making it interesting, useful, and game-session friendly presents an ongoing challenge. Sometimes the Matrix rules do not match up with the model of reality as a whole at all, and the system breaks down, working against immersion instead of with it. Other times, the Matrix rules are such that whenever the team's hacker decides to submerge themselves in the digital ocean, they are basically going on a one-person dungeon run. While they are busy securing a Matrix advantage for the team, the other players may opt to go out and get dinner. Efforts to integrate the hacker on-site with the team in a non-disruptive and reasonably quick way have been hit or miss to date.

Part of the problem is the nature of how we know hacking works, versus what makes for an interesting narrative. Hacking in the real world has turned into a mixture of social engineering, information gathering, and scripting. While the results might be interesting, the process itself generally isn't, at least not to an outside observer. And it also might not be terribly interesting to describe to an otherwise interested and engaged player. On the other hand, hacking cannot be ignored, and not just because the tropes of cyberspace are tied so strongly to Shadowrun. It cannot be ignored because of how useful it is, between gathering information on a target, tracing communications, or getting access to illicit paydata. In short, if done poorly, it could be the most boring part of Shadowrun, but it must be done, because it is also one of the most lucrative activities an enterprising criminal can undertake in order to meet their goals.

I am keeping all this in mind while rewriting the Matrix fluff and crunch. I wish to make the Matrix interesting, and make it make sense that it is interesting. I also want to keep the hacker involved with the actions of the team. I want to be able to provide GMs and players alike with incentives to have the hacker on-station with the team, at least some of the time. I want a living, breathing Matrix that reflects the realities of a constantly connected always online world. And I still want to present an interesting and engaging cyberspace for GMs to describe and for PCs to take flight in.

Just like in fourth and fifth edition, my Matrix is a wireless one. While there are still plenty of wires involved - fiber optics will never go out of style - the way most people interact with the Matrix is the way an increasingly large number of us interact with the internet now. That is to say, wirelessly. Unlike the modern day, however, where wireless communications are typically a spoke and hub affair, with cell signals being routed to a tower that than talks to the wired grid, in Shadowrun, the Matrix is a meshnet. The rise of cheap ubiquotous processing power, scientific advances to get around various electromagnetic interference limitations, and the broadening of how much of the EM spectrum is available for commercial traffic has lead to the dominance of the internet of things, of objects. Now when your character connects online, their communication device is probably in contact with over a dozen things - thermostats, power meters, smoke detectors, traffic control cameras, other people's devices. The mesh protocols at work ensure that the signals from the character's device gets to its intended destination. At the same time, the character's device is also a router in this network, passing on communications itself. Ubiquitous and powerful encryption, along with carefully designed protocols, ensure that this network is robust and difficult to interfere with. In fact, the meshnet itself is a response to the events of the Crash 2.0. While before, a massive chaotic virus was able to cripple entire networks by taking down strategic hubs and regional backbones, and overloading the processing capability of servers, now both traffic and processing load are massively distributed. Before the second Crash, the Jormungand virus was a catastrophic Matrix-ending event waiting to happen. After the Crash 2.0, the Jormungand would find itself simply making a lot of devices a little warmer than they were before as processing and signal load are distributed throughout the entire mesh.

The meshnet makes some tasks easier, as a hacker can now take advantage of any number of a combination of exploits in flaws in the many devices that make up the Matrix. It also make some tasks harder - generally tracing a signal back to its origin would require piecing together several bitstreams spread out over multiple devices, a task that is nearly impossible. Also, while earlier generations of Shadowrun hacker could be content with being hyper-specialists in the field of computing, the modern Shadowrun hacker also needs to be a seasoned electronic warfare expert in order to be fully effective.

Defense is not impossible, as simply using a fully wired network is still possible. Other solutions to the hacker problem is to have closed-off meshnets, either through judicious signal and encryption usage, or to block of a building's network by using signal-defeating paint and faraday cage architectures. Also, while most of the Matrix is provided by the internet of things, a hacker can and should expect that for important things, megacorporations and governments rely on their own hardware. Computer technology has continued to advance, and it is in a host where a hacker will find security spiders and IC software lurking, waiting to ruin their day and possibly end their life.

What all this adds up to is a useful toolbox for both the GM and the player. The player can now have their character on the run, on the field with their team. The Matrix is ubiquotus and everywhere, and with no need to jack in to a dedicated cable line somewhere, the hacker character can provide support while on the run. They can be right next to their team, providing signal hardening, jamming enemy signals, and maintaining a tactical map for their team, as well as keeping an eye out for enemy hackers and riggers. If the player decides they want to play it safe and keep their hacker at home, this is possible, so long as they and their team are willing to take the risk of having insufficient electronic warfare support (as this virtually requires the hacker to actually be on station). If the GM wishes to get the hacker hot in the action though, he can simply have the team run against a building that's hardened against outside Matrix interference, or put critical software-related assets on a server node that's only accessible through a wired connection. Trade-offs and balances are possible, which makes for interesting gameplay.

Of course, all of this is just fluff, but the fluff can now be used to turn around and create crunch. The crunch must be true to the fluff, and I think we have built compelling fluff. We just now need to figure out, what is it, mechanically, we really actually want our hackers to be doing? While I've talked a lot about the infrastructure of the Matrix, what makes it tick, it's now important to turn to what does this mean, as a practical matter.

It's important to consider how characters typically interact with the Matrix. Here in the real world in 2015, most of us interact with the internet through a general-purpose browser or a special-purpose app on our computers and cell phones. Some of us interact with the internet from a command line in a terminal, but this is rare, and generally only done for specific tasks. In Shadowrun, Joe Average may still use these options, but his most frequent interaction with the Matrix is actually through augmented reality. Whether due to cybereyes, goggles, or electronic contact lenses, the average citizen of Shadowrun can 'see' the Matrix around them everywhere. Augmented Reality Objects, or 'AROs' (pronounced 'arrows') fill their vision. You can think of this as virtual displays and screens and monitors floating around in 3D around a person. These 3D images are not real, of course; they are not even holograms. They are only present on the display of a given user. But they give the compelling illusion of being 'real', and many of them can be interacted with. As Joe walks down the street to work, he may see AROs pop up from stores as he passes them, generally displaying ads targeted to him. As he passes by a restaurant, he might pause, prompting an ARO to appear that will let him open up and look at a virtual menu for the restaurant, if he so chooses. Overhead, a police drone may fly by. The drone itself may be in some disrepair, dinged, and a little dull in colour, but its Knight Errant ARO hovering just below it will always be pristine, reassuring Joe Average that today, he is a safe citizen, thanks to the overwatch of the local police force. When he finally makes it to his office to sit down to work, he has no computer. Instead, the building mainframe simply provides him the ARO illusion of a computer, with a virtual keyboard he can type on and a virtual display he can look at to see his work. Phone calls announces themselves with a ringing noise only he can hear and a bouncing virtual 3D phone handle in his field of view that he can pick up and talk with. Some of these AROs will be broadcast publically, and other people might be able to see Joe's virtual desktop. Others may be private, and maybe only Joe can see when he is getting a call. Particularly when it's from his mistress. Especially when it's from his mistress.

The other way of interacting with the Matrix in Shadowrun is through VR, Virtual Reality. While AR overlays an interface over what you are actually seeing, VR is a full virtual experience. The user jacks in, and the real world melts away, to be presented with new virtual imagery that rarely has any resemblance to reality. This is the stuff of traditional cyberpunk, and ideas of what this might be like can be seen in movies like Lawnmower man. While jacked in to virtual reality, of course, the user doesn't actually go anywhere. Their body just slumps wherever they happen to be at, while their mind interfaces with the computer. In traditional Shadowrun, the VR landscape is generated by a combination of a user's computer, and the host that the user is currently interfacing with. In the wireless meshnet Shadowrun, this imagery is dictated by a standard committee, and is presumably a sort of mutually-agreed upon appearance generated by all the devices connected to the Matrix. In the original Shadowrun vision of cyberpunk, how 'real' VR looked and felt (and sometimes even smelled and tasted) depended on the power of the host that a user was attached to. More powerful hosts could provide and produce more realistic virtual imagery. With the new wireless Matrix, this is no longer true, and how realistic VR looks and feels seems to be more reliant on the skill of the artist who created the imagery in the first place.

I've always liked to think of VR as the 'command line' of the Matrix, with AR being the more commonly used user interface. Most users, most of the time, interact with the Matrix through AR. Those that do choose to use VR are more likely to use it for games or entertainment than as a serious tool. However, for the dedicated Hacker, VR is a tool. Through the use of dedicated hardware, both internal and external (I'm temporarily ignoring Technomancers here for the purpose of discussion), a hacker is simply faster in VR. They are able to put their thoughts into immediate action, multi-tasking and dancing along the light electric. I like to also think that part of the reason that a hacker is so effective is that even in Shadowrun, their is benefit in taking advantage of the metahuman mind's versatility and incredible parallelism to make certain Matrix actions easier. Basically, I like to believe that when a hacker does their thing, it is a cooperative action between them and their deck. The mind does what it is good at, and the computer in turns does what it is good at, and both of them return a result that is greater than the sum of its parts. This is not always supported by the official mainline fluff, but it is an idea I plan on emphasizing as I approach Matrix design.