---
layout: post
title: On Shadowrun
permlink: On Shadowrun
tags: [opinion, shadowrun]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
Welcome to my little slice of Shadowrun. It wasn’t my first system, but among all the roleplaying systems I played idly in my youth, it’s certainly my favorite, the one I am most familiar with, and the one I really cut my teeth on as a roleplayer. I started with third ed, and will probably finish with fifth, because god knows I probably won’t have the energy for this bullshit anymore when I’m 40.
<!--more-->
And by bullshit, let me be clear (in case my players are reading this), I don’t mean actually running the sessions. My players are generally great people, I wouldn’t run this shit for them otherwise. By bullshit, I mean having to keep up with the editions. Buying every new crunch book that comes out and avoiding every splat book. Having to keep up with all these books, reading them, getting intimate with them, because let’s be honest, Shadowrun’s a crunchy system. It likes to be a simulation, unlike, say, Amber Diceless, Apocalypse World, or Nobilis. And that’s cool, that’s part of it’s charm, I wouldn’t have it any other way. But that means getting all the books.

So I buy the book. Read the fluff. Hit the forums, read the discussions, decide who has a point and who doesn’t, figure out the themes, make shit up. Try to figure out what’s fun and what’s not. Generate NPCs, generate runs. Try to decide this edition how to make the Matrix fucking work for the hacker/decker/technomancer/otaku/slicer/cracker/Neo/lexmechanic/virtuakinetic/netrunner/whatever, because I always find it to be a big mess.

So once I have the rules down, I have to try and figure out, okay, what themes do I want to run and which ones do I want to ignore. And then I gotta make the programs to help me GM, because Shadowrun’s crunchy, remember? So I make the programs, and part of making the programs is running some monte carlo simulations, because balance is a crapshoot. Gotta figure out karma and money curves. Everything may look alright on session one, which is -bullshit- nothing ever looks right in session one, but let’s go with that idea anyway. With some nudging, hand-waving and eyebrow-waggling, the players are arguably well balanced in session one, but gotta figure out what they’re going to look like come session ten.

So of course, come to find out, that the way I hand out karma and money, by session ten the mage is pissed because he’s a weenie still. Sure he’s got metamagic and spells out the whazoo but it looks like the way they’ve made drain work -this- time means that he can’t actually afford to cast any better because the drain will cause his brain to dribble out his ears just as bad as when he was in the first session. In the meanwhile, the Matrix-abuser-du-jour currently has an Agent parked permanently in a military mainframe somewhere because they -can- and the only reason every ‘run doesn’t get blessed with a Thor shot is less because the team’s Matrix buddy don’t want to, and more because of inconveniences involving orbital paths and timing. In the meanwhile, the rigger has a small military of drones that could pretty much substitute for an entire runner team all by themselves, and that’s cool, they’re happy. But over to the street sammy, she’s got her desired loadout of augmentations, and she’s happy, but if I put up opposition that’ll actually challenge her the team will end up in liquid form and she’ll be the last woman standing. But if instead the opposition is balanced to challenge the team, well, they -might- be challenged but they’ll never know because the sammy will be standing on top of a pile of bodies, laughing maniacally and declaring herself goddess of all war.

I gotta fix all this. I can, and often do, fix it socially. In other words, I talk with players, figure out what they want out of the game, adjust things on the fly, use game fluff to justify why some things work and others don’t, get some heavy roleplaying going on. That’s actually not too hard, and I like doing that. But it’d be nice if things would also work just by the fucking numbers. I haven’t looked deeply at it, but it looks like, in general, in SR5, armor -still- makes it so shots that don’t penetrate can possibly take you out faster than the ones that do because of how physical damage converts to stun. It was this way in SR4, I remember a really long forum discussion about how to fix it, with some guys stubbornly refusing to see that it was a problem because they solved it using roleplaying. Which is fine, that’s totes a legit way to fix that problem, but god damn it mechanically by the numbers -the problem is still there-, you just found a way to wallpaper over it, but I want the mechanics to work too.

That’s the sort of bullshit I’m not sure I can keep up with forever.

So welcome to my little slice of Shadowrun. I’m locked onto fifth edition. If you don’t like it, I don’t care, we can argue about it over on Dumpshock. Here, I will post stuff that works for me, fixes I’m making to the system. I’ll post stories for fluff, and my methodology for crunch. I’m going to try to fix fifth edition, and make it the last edition I’ll ever need. Along the way I’ll probably break things. There will be redactions. However, hopefully, in this big mess of continuous irritation that will probably be the hallmark of my online contribution to the greater Shadowrun ecosystem, I am sincerely hoping that other people will find gems that they will find useful.